Liar!
ALFRED LANNING LIT HIS CIGAR CAREFULLY, BUT the tips of his fingers were trembling slightly. His
gray eyebrows hunched low as he spoke between puffs.
“It reads minds all right-damn little doubt about that! But why?” He looked at Mathematician Peter
Bogert, “Well?”
Bogert flattened his black hair down with both hands, “That was the thirty-fourth RB model we’ve
turned out, Lanning. All the others were strictly orthodox.”
The third man at the table frowned. Milton Ashe was the youngest officer of U. S. Robot &
Mechanical Men, Inc., and proud of his post.
“Listen, Bogert. There wasn’t a hitch in the assembly from start to finish. I guarantee that.”
Bogert’s thick lips spread in a patronizing smile, “Do you? If you can answer for the entire
assembly line, I recommend your promotion. By exact count, there are seventy-five thousand, two
hundred and thirty-four operations necessary for the manufacture of a single positronic brain, each
separate operation depending for successful completion upon any number of factors, from five to a
hundred and five. If any one of them goes seriously wrong, the ‘brain’ is ruined. I quote our own
information folder, Ashe.”
Milton Ashe flushed, but a fourth voice cut off his reply.
“If we’re going to start by trying to fix the blame on one another, I’m leaving.” Susan Calvin’s
hands were folded tightly in her lap, and the little lines about her thin, pale lips deepened, “We’ve
got a mind-reading robot on our hands and it strikes me as rather important that we find out just
why it reads minds. We’re not going to do that by saying, ‘Your fault! My fault!’ “
Her cold gray eyes fastened upon Ashe, and he grinned.
Lanning grinned too, and, as always at such times, his long white hair and shrewd little eyes made
him the picture of a biblical patriarch, “True for you, Dr. Calvin.”
His voice became suddenly crisp, “Here’s everything in pill-concentrate form. We’ve produced a
positronic brain of supposedly ordinary vintage that’s got the remarkable property of being able to
tune in on thought waves. It would mark the most important advance in robotics in decades, if we
knew how it happened. We don’t, and we have to find out. Is that clear?”
“May I make a suggestion?” asked Bogert.
“Go ahead!”
